105
Chapter 5
Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural 
Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze 
Age Societies in the Central Northern 
European Plain
Human-Environmental Interaction Concerning 
Bourdieu’s Forms of Capital
Jan Piet Brozio, Jutta Kneisel, Stefanie Schaefer-Di Maida, Julian Laabs, 
Ingo Feeser, Artur Ribeiro, and Sebastian Schultrich
5.1  Introduction
There are distinct advantages in writing and researching as an ensemble of scholars 
in the field of archaeology, especially when they include people of distinct genders, 
age-groups, and cultural backgrounds, who tend to engage with different chrono­
logical phases and different geographical areas. Furthermore, as an ensemble group, 
our background incorporates different sets of skills developed in archaeology, such 
as those furnished by the natural scientific disciplines and the humanities, allowing 
us to address material culture, social theory and the palaeoenvironment. When 
observing an object, each researcher will have a different train of thought, because 
each one observes the object according to their unique frames of reference. The 
observations on the object, its qualities and characteristics, can be quite varied 
because they depend on the researcher’s community of practice. Nevertheless, 
J. P. Brozio
Formerly, Institute of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Archaeology, Kiel University, 
Kiel, Germany
e-mail: jpbrozio@ufg.uni-kiel.de 
J. Kneisel (*) · S. Schaefer-Di Maida · I. Feeser · A. Ribeiro · S. Schultrich
Institute of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Archaeology, Kiel University, Kiel, Germany
e-mail: jutta.kneisel@ufg.uni-kiel.de; sschaefer@ufg.uni-kiel.de; 
ifeeser@ufg.uni-kiel.de; aribeiro@sfb1266.uni-kiel.de; sschultrich@sfb1266.uni-kiel.de 
J. Laabs 
Department of History, Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany
e-mail: julian.laabs@uni-leipzig.de 
© The Author(s) 2024
J. Müller et al. (eds.), Perspectives on Socio-environmental Transformations in 
Ancient Europe, Quantitative Archaeology and Archaeological Modelling, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-53314-3_5
106
despite the variety of viewpoints, all this knowledge remains complementary and 
can be brought together meaningfully.
The CRC 1266 is a research group that unites many scholars under a constella­
tion of practices, where contexts such as the one described above are directed 
towards understanding different transformation processes, which are researched at 
different scales of interaction, and which reveal meaningful patterns relevant to our 
understanding of the past. Ultimately, the aim of the CRC 1266 is to compare, test, 
and analyse transformation processes within a special time frame in Europe and 
beyond (Müller & Kirleis, 2019). In order to enable a differentiated analysis, an 
intensive exchange between the involved CRC 1266 subprojects researching 
Northern Germany and the creation of a comparable data basis was required. 
However, this uniform recording of the material basis did not exist before and was 
compiled in course of the framework of the CRC 1266.
­
2
5.1
­
­
­
­
The practice of discerning patterns that emerge from the inductive analysis of 
data is usually restricted to a single period (Allentoft et al., 2022; Bunting et al., 
2022), or even just a short sub-phase; it is rare to see cross-cultural comparisons of 
patterns that extend beyond a single chronological phase (Kohler & Smith, 2018). 
This is because the material culture, the architecture, the environment, etc. of past 
societies could have had very different meanings depending on the period and loca­
tion (Brozio et al., 2019; Kneisel et al., 2019). What might have been a fairly cheap 
commodity for one social group might have also been a very luxurious and rare 
commodity for another group. To address the issue, we compare diachronic data by 
adapting Bourdieu’s (1986) forms of capital (economic, symbolic, social, cultural) 
and applying them to our Neolithic and Bronze Age data. Regardless of the mate­
rial, the four forms of Bourdieu’s capital allow for an attribution of discrete artefact 
groups to a socio-economic sphere, or in other words, the data we use serve as a 
proxy to determining what type of capital it could have represented to our past infor­
mants. In addition to our material culture, we also include proxies for demographic 
development for a period of c. 3500 years.
J. P. Brozio et al.
107
 
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
108
5.2  Theoretical Approach
When comparing proxies derived from material culture, which represent societal 
and economic characteristics of a society over a time-span of 3500 years and over 
an area of approximately 15,500 m2 the question arises: is it possible to compare 
things that might have had different meanings, significances, and/or different 
purposes?
This issue was discussed in Igor Kopytoff’s (1986) concept of the cultural biog­
raphy of things. In the social analysis of objects Kopytoff followed the Marxian 
perspective, which viewed objects as imbued with use-value and exchange-value 
(Kopytoff, 1986, pp.  70, 83), whereas Arjun Appadurai distinguished things as 
products and non-products, thus defining things as exchangeable (Appadurai, 1986, 
pp.  12–17). This perspective helped Kopytoff in understanding the life-story of 
objects. According to him, every product has a general character, because the prod­
uct has a certain value and is comparable with other products, as exchange value for 
other products or money. In contrast, there are things that are not exchangeable with 
others because of their singular character. As he argued, both categories – products/
non-products – are ideal forms that do not exist, because every product has a poten­
tial for singularisation and exchange; their evaluation depends entirely on the social 
context (Kopytoff, 1986, p. 73). A product can be a product or a non-product both 
diachronically and synchronically. The order of transformation and also the syn­
chronous meaning as product and non-product accumulate to an object biography. 
For an example, Kopytoff describes the biography of a Suku hut in Zaire, which 
during its lifespan of circa 10 years underwent a transformation from a house for a 
couple or a woman with children to a guest house or a house for a widow. After that, 
the hut was used as a meeting place for teenagers, then as a kitchen and then as 
stable for goats or chickens. Finally, termites took over the hut and the building col­
lapsed (Kopytoff, 1986, p. 67). An object can thus undergo a unique biographic 
process that transforms it from general commodity to a singular object.
The concept of object biography has been used to some degree in archaeology 
(cf. Gerritsen, 2009; Gosden & Marshall, 1999; Joy, 2009; Jung, 2015) although not 
always according to the framework designed by Kopytoff. The challenge raised by 
Kopytoff’s biography concerns whether it is possible to compare different values of 
things from vastly different times and places.
According to Polanyi (1944), such a comparison only works if one takes the 
emic perspective. Due to the lack of contemporary witnesses from the Neolithic and 
the Bronze Age, we decided to turn to the epistemological process to assess value 
and relevance of material culture in societal context as established by Bourdieu 
(1986). A clear and brief summary of this process is provided by Bernbeck (2009), 
who explains Bourdieu’s process in three steps as follows: A first approach, he says, 
is to engage intensively with the emic view and the basic non-dialogical structures 
of the research subject, which  – as mentioned  – is of course problematic for 
J. P. Brozio et al.
109
prehistoric studies. A second step, according to his description, was to break away 
from the paradigm of understanding and to analyse it from the objective etic per­
spective – “[…] the traditional cold-blooded scientific analysis […]” (our transla­
tion: Bernbeck, 2009, p. 2) – thirdly and finally, the subjectivity of this objectivist 
perspective had to be reflexively related to the “object” of investigation.
Bourdieu’s (1986, pp.  241–258) division into economic, social, cultural and 
symbolic capital, which places people in social space, i.e. describes the relation­
ships between people or their positions. With this division of the concept capital into 
different representations, he provides a suitable theoretical model which can be 
used to categorise archaeological material accordingly (Kadrow & Müller, 2019). 
Economic capital represents all forms of material wealth (e.g. income, movable 
assets, land ownership; Bourdieu, 1986, pp. 17–21). Archaeologically, we could 
recognise economic capital in the form of accumulation of finds, grave goods, and/
or surplus production. Social capital comprises social networks (Bourdieu, 1986, 
pp. 21–24). Here, the relationships between people or groups of people can, for 
example, order the common possession of resources. This requires a willingness to 
cooperate, which we find reflected in the archaeological evidence, for example, in 
the form of communal house and grave building activities. Bourdieu divides cul­
tural capital into three forms: incorporated, objectified and institutionalised. 
Incorporated cultural capital is – as the name already suggests – body-bound and is 
learned or instilled as people grow up, and modified in the course of their education 
(Bourdieu, 1986, pp. 17–19). It is, for example, taste, knowledge or personal behav­
iour. Objectified cultural capital consists of cultural goods (Bourdieu, 1986, 
pp. 19–20). Transferred to archaeology, these can be artefacts, especially everyday 
objects, made of pottery or flint. Institutionalised cultural capital comprises the 
titles one acquires during one’s life (Bourdieu, 1986, pp. 20–21). For prehistory, we 
could speak of social functions that included, for example, decision-making pro­
cesses or the regulation of resource distribution. Symbolic capital refers to one’s 
rank in a society, which may not necessarily have been hierarchical in prehistory. 
This can show itself, for example, in the form of prestige goods or given symbology, 
but also in who received a special grave and who did not.
5.3  Material and Methods
The process of assigning artefact groups to the forms of capital proved to be diffi­
cult, as they are interpreted and attributed differently for the Neolithic and Bronze 
Age because of different traditions of research. The challenge was to find common 
ground where different artefacts or different materials allow the same statement 
about the society in question.
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
110
5.3.1  Defining Socio-cultural Spheres
According to Bourdieu (1986), all the mentioned forms of capital are interdepen­
dent and can therefore allow a series of different scenarios. Thus, no standard 
scheme exists that could explain processes and reactions according to capital forms 
and societal behaviour. For the comparison of the Neolithic and Bronze Age mate­
rial, we determined from our expert perspectives which artefacts and features can be 
assigned to each form of capital. We have used this classification as a basis for our 
comparisons. For example, not all periods within our time perspective have axes or 
swords. Another example is that the materials used for artefacts are different (e.g. 
stone, bronze). However, in the case of swords and axes we see both of them as an 
expression of a certain social role and thus conceptualise them as traces of such 
across the epochs.
5.3.1.1  Material – Monumentality, Artefact Studies and Domestic Sites
The reconstruction of the intensity of monument-building activity through the 
Neolithic is based on available data from primary burials in single mounds and the 
oldest assemblages in megaliths or non-megalithic long barrows. An interpolated 
relative index of the construction of new monuments is derived through the described 
aoristic evaluation according to the detailed chronology. Values from the relative 
index obtained in this way can be extrapolated to the number of monuments known 
from the Archäologische Landesaufnahme Schleswig-Holstein (Archaeological 
State Survey) that, in contrast to other areas of Germany, covered nearly the whole 
southern Cimbrian Peninsula with fieldwalking and other types of surveys (Ahrens, 
1966; Hingst, 1959; Kersten, 1951, 1981; Kersten & Schwantes, 1939). Known 
undated burial mounds are differentiated according to the known (through excava­
tions) relative temporal distribution of mounds to the different phases in periods 
between the Neolithic and the Middle Ages, a procedure that Holst (2013) also suc­
cessfully used for Denmark. Thus, these monuments with more general dating cat­
egories were redistributed to the main periods according to the relative frequency of 
dated records within the main periods (Brozio et al., 2019; Holst, 2013, pp. 42–44). 
The distribution of megalithic tombs in their temporal dimension is reported for the 
southern Cimbrian Peninsula (Hoika, 1999; Lorenz, 2012).
Complementary evidence of economic, as well as social, aspects of the Neolithic 
societies is provided by the character of artefact types and categories, which are 
linked to specific purposes. These objects of material culture are associated via their 
contexts and functions to utilitarian uses within economic production and/or with 
non-utilitarian meaning within the social and ritual sphere of the societies. Thus, the 
different quantity and sequences of artefact categories provide information about 
economic and social aspects of societies. Stone axes (Schultrich, 2018; Zápotocký, 
1992), stone adzes (Breske, 2017), metal objects (Klassen, 2004; Schultrich, 2019), 
flint daggers (Kühn, 1979; Willroth, 2002) and jewellery (Woltermann, 2016) in 
different find contexts like burials, hoards (Rech, 1979) or single finds (Rassmann, 
J. P. Brozio et al.
111
1993) are available as data sets for such an analysis (Brozio et al., 2019). Information 
on settlements was compiled from different sources (Brozio, 2016; Hage, 2016; 
Schultrich, 2019; Steffens, 2009). In the Bronze Age, new categories are added 
(swords, daggers), in other categories the material changes from stone to copper and 
bronze (axes). Stone tools become fewer and eventually disappear altogether. The 
catalogues “Die Funde der älteren Bronzezeit des nordischen Kreises” contain 
extensive find material for the Older Bronze Age (Aner & Kersten, 1978, 1979, 
1991, 1993; Aner et al., 2005, 2011, 2017). For the younger Bronze Age, a complete 
record of all finds up to 1993 is available (Schmidt, 1993). New excavated settle­
ment sites were also added (Donat, 2018; Meier, 2013).
5.3.1.2  Methods – Aoristic Method/PCR and Diversity Index
‘One way to engage more effectively with temporal uncertainty is for us to make the 
best of all our available temporal information, however fuzzy’ (Bevan et al., 2013). 
The ‘aoristic’ statistical method is used for a better comparison between quantita­
tive data, for example from pollen diagrams or sum-calibrations, and typochrono­
logical classification of archaeological data. The aoristic method creates a relative 
frequency graph based on different dating accuracies – such as ‘Bronze Age’, ‘Older 
Bronze Age’, ‘Period I-II’, ‘Period Ib’ and 14C dates (Mischka, 2004; Ratcliffe, 
2000). In order to grant comparability of the data, the different dating ranges are 
divided and uniformly plotted in 100-year steps on the time scale. A dating such as 
Late Bronze Age (1100–500 BCE) is divided by n/6, a dating to Period IV early 
(1100–1000) is divided by n/1 and plotted on the timeline per 100 years. The sum 
of all artefact frequencies provides the aoristically calculated frequency curve. 
While this reflects the different timespans and dating accuracies, it allows for a 
substantial comparison with other data (Brozio et al., 2019; Kneisel et al., 2019). A 
comparison between Bronze Age and Neolithic pottery makes little sense, as the 
result would only show the differences between the periods. For this reason, we 
decided to use the diversity of shapes and decorations for a comparison. Diversity 
indices are known from biology and can, for example, describe the species diversity 
of a region or area. The Shannon–Wiener index is a mathematical quantity used in 
biology to describe diversity or biodiversity (Spellerberg & Fedor, 2003). The index 
describes the diversity in the data under consideration, taking into account both the 
number of different data categories (types) and the abundance (number of pots/
sherds per type). Since, for example, the decoration of vessels – such as knobs, 
handles or vessel roughness – is a free decision of the potters that does not contrib­
ute to the functionality of the vessels, it can be used as a measure of creativity, 
individuality or simply diversity in the material. The same applies to the shape. 
Shape follows style, taste and fashion, but also functionality. A high diversity of 
forms indicates a specialised function (bowl, dish, plate, jug) or the absence of any 
norm. However, the latter is not possible within a society, as shapes are adopted 
unconsciously.
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
112
As the aoristic time series summarise different values, mostly counts but also 
floor area and the Shanon–Wiener Index, they were standardised statistically as 
z-scores for better comparison.
5.3.1.3  Characterising Social Cultural Spheres – Forms of Capital
­
5.1
Symbolic Capital
This form of capital encompasses the social rank of an individual in society and is 
acquired through recognition and is presented to the outside world. The battle axes 
of the Neolithic and daggers and swords of the Bronze Age represent a social rank 
and a certain prestige of the buried person. Also, house sizes, here given in m2, can 
be understood as a sign of certain social importance of the inhabitants presented to 
the community and outside group. Although, house sizes could be understood as 
economic capital, as Bourdieu (1986) states, symbolic capital is indicated by eco­
nomic capital. To assign house size to the realm of economic capital would neglect 
the symbolic meaning of houses, and would overemphasise economic capital within 
the capital structure. Houses as symbolic capital of small groups are known from 
various ethnographic parallels (Wunderlich, 2019). Here, we have assigned houses 
to symbolic capital in the sense of projection of internal socio-economic realities 
within a community.
Table 5.1  Forms of capital and assigned archaeological contexts
Form of 
capital
Archaeological contexts
Symbolic
Hatchets (‘battle axes’) and swords
Daggers
House sizes
Social
Copper (Neolithic) and gold (Bronze Age)
Amber
Number of monuments
Cultural
Diversity in pottery shapes
Diversity in pottery decorations
Treatment of the dead (single vs. collective burials; inhumation vs. cremation) – 
qualitative proxy
Economic
Hoards
Sickles
Axes
Monument size
J. P. Brozio et al.
113
Social Capital
Relationships between people and groups, access to networks and the intensity of 
these networks make up social capital. Archaeologically, we can identify resources 
that are not locally available. Bronze was omitted here because there is no compa­
rable equivalent in the Neolithic. Instead, Neolithic copper items and Bronze Age 
gold finds were combined in one proxy. Both materials have to be imported from 
afar and hint to the embeddedness of supra-regional networks providing such 
objects/resources. Amber serves as an indicator of reduced network intensity when 
it is present. When it is absent – and occurs massively in a distant region at the same 
time – it is an indicator of supra-regional networks. Likewise, the number of monu­
ments is seen as an indicator of cooperation between local groups and stronger 
intra-regional networks.
Cultural Capital
Cultural capital is knowledge of practices and action (Handlungswissen) in any 
form and is the basis of most archaeological remains, as its realisation can lead to 
production of material culture. However, it is difficult to grasp materially. Burial 
customs and changes in material culture can generally be seen as cultural capital 
because they either show knowledge of how to perform normative implementations 
of practices or the introduction of new knowledge altering/replacing old practices. 
In our examples, however, we have the issue that the quantification of respective 
proxies tends to be mutually exclusive. The transitional phases of practices burial 
costumes (e.g. single vs. collective burials or inhumation vs. cremation) can be used 
as a qualitative argument to explain transformative processes. Therefore, we relied 
here on a diversity measure that represents differences in the frequency of pottery 
forms and decoration seen as cultural phenomena.
Economic Capital
This form of capital circumscribes possessions and material values, which in our 
modern times are comparable to money. Our assignment of depots refers to the 
alienable possessions of a society that are deposited in order to be taken out of the 
value-cycle. The number of sickles is often equated with money (Sommerfeld, 
1994), but they can also have an economic value in terms of agriculture. Likewise, 
hatchets (axes), made from flint or bronze, are expressions of labour in the form of 
tools. The construction of large monuments is also to be seen as a labour effort, for 
which further surplus must be available in order to sustain labourers. The larger the 
monument, the more food and resources must be provided.
5.3.2  Demographic Proxies
Although demography is not defined as a form of capital, it is highly related to all of 
them. Population size, density and structure can be understood as an important scaling 
and influencing factor in the social, economic, symbolic and cultural realms of a soci­
ety (Bettencourt et al., 2007; Feinman, 2011; Shennan et al., 2017) and vice versa.
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
114
5.3.2.1  Composite Kernel Density Estimation Models 
of Radiocarbon Dates
As a proxy to represent the demographic development of our study area we use the 
common approach ‘dates as data’ (Rick, 1987) employing summed radiocarbon 
dates from archaeological records (e.g. Crema & Bevan, 2021; Hinz et al., 2012; 
Shennan & Edinborough, 2007). Concerning the amount and representation of the 
radiocarbon data, it is not possible to operate only with dates from the Southern 
Cimbrian Peninsula, as especially Bronze Age contexts are highly under-­represented, 
due to research and sampling biases. To compensate for this issue, radiocarbon 
dates from Southern Denmark were integrated into the data set. The geographical 
and cultural closeness of both regions throughout prehistory enables us to draw 
from the combined record conclusion for the whole aggregated region (Kneisel 
et al., 2019, 2022). We retrieved the radiocarbon data from the Xronos data base 
(https://xronos.ch/), RADON-B (Kneisel et al., 2013) and the Feeser et al. (2019) 
data set, further our data was completed by the compiled data set of Bunbury et al. 
(2023). As a proxy to represent the demographic development of our study area we 
use the approach ‘dates as data’ and employ composite kernel density estimation 
(cKDE) models of the radiocarbon dates. cKDE models or kernel density models in 
general provide a more robust alternative to summed probability distributions to 
assess radiocarbon dates as a demographic proxy (Crema, 2022; Parkinson et al., 
2021). For computing the cKDE models we used the R package rcarbon (Bevan 
et al., 2022) on our site-level binned data (h = 100 years), with the kernel bandwith 
of 75 years and 500 simulations. Radicarbon dates with high measurement errors 
(>150 14C years) are excluded from the analysis. The refined data set contains 1384 
radiocarbon dates from 186 sites.
5.3.2.2  Palynological Human Impact Proxy
2019
5.1
­
2019
2021
2014
J. P. Brozio et al.
115
5.4  Analysis
The two main analyses are a time series of the forms of capital and the performance 
of a principal component analysis on the 100-year binned time series. With both of 
these data representations, we can explore the temporal development more compre­
hensively. However, as the amount of data is too vast to present in detail, the follow­
ing description of the results only includes the general trends, extreme deviations, 
important correlations, as well as possible underlying structural behaviour. Detailed 
and exhaustive data analysis can be accessed and comprehended in the supplemen­
tary material.
5.4.1  Timeseries
Symbolic Capital
5.2
­
1992
2019 2020
2022
­
2018
1979
2022
With the introduction of houses and a sedentary way of life in the Neolithic, two-­
aisled houses are built as single farmsteads, hamlets and from 3400 BCE in the form 
of villages (Brozio, 2016; Hage, 2016; Müller, 2013, 2019). This is followed by a 
phase between 2900 and 2200 BCE, from which only a few and then only small 
buildings are documented. This changes around 2200 BCE, with the construction of 
houses with storage buildings and associated fields (Kleijne et al., 2021).
The introduction of two-aisled houses and the later agglomeration in villages 
(Brozio, 2016; Hage, 2016; Müller, 2019) around 3400 BCE are in the context of an 
economic boom phase. The buildings represent the prestige, the economic strength, 
and the social cohesion of the groups. Battle axes and daggers materialise the 
acquired recognition of individuals within the groups. This is particularly evident in 
the accessories, which represent individualism and expression of personal prestige 
(Brozio, 2020).
The Bronze Age begins with a drop in symbolic capital, as daggers, axes/swords 
and house size decline. However, this may also be a data gap, as there are many 
daggers, especially in Holstein, that are not dated (Schaefer-Di Maida, 2023). Axes 
and swords increase from 1700 BCE onwards and can be interpreted as badges or 
emblems of prestige (Bunnefeld, 2014, 2018; Kristiansen, 1984; Kristiansen & 
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
116
 
Larsson, 2005). In this context, swords significantly predominate in the data curve 
compared to axes, so that a transfer of the symbolic meaning of axes to swords can 
be assumed with the Bronze Age. Around 1500 BCE, the size of houses from the 
Southern Cimbrian Peninsula increases (Kneisel et al., 2019, p. 1615, Fig. 6). This 
is also due to the use of three-aisled buildings and the introduction of the so-called 
J. P. Brozio et al.
117
dwelling stable house, which came into widespread use around 1500 BCE (Meier, 
2013). The enlargement of the house and thus also of the household requires reor­
ganisation. The direct (overlapping) connection of houses and barrows (e.g. domes­
tic site Handewitt, Trappendahl, etc., cf. Svanberg, 2005, p. 79) suggest that, for 
example, the head of the household was buried by the household community in a 
barrow. The household thus represents itself in the individual, who is singled out for 
prestige. Symbolic capital thus reaches its zenith as titles and achievements acquire 
a public monumental representation that cannot be unseen in the landscape. Around 
1100 BCE, swords and daggers as well as house sizes decrease considerably. There 
seems to be an end of elites and associated household communities and associated 
large houses. The highlighted personalities lose importance and with them symbolic 
capital changes. The collective is now in the foreground and manifests itself particu­
larly through uniformly equipped urn graves in cemeteries.
A social transformation can be observed that is repeated several times: the trans­
formation of societies from the individual to the collective and vice versa. This 
phenomenon is first comprehensible between 3800 and 3200 BCE. First, individual 
burials in long barrows and partly in dolmens appear. Then, collective burials in 
passage graves become predominant. Hereafter, 3200–2700  BCE, single burials 
(solely, in small or larger graveyards or at passage graves) increase again (van der 
Velde et al., 2020) and this development reaches a peak with the ealy SGC (Brozio 
et al., 2019; Hübner, 2005; Schultrich, 2018). Then, in turn, secondary extensions in 
the burial mounds, as well as multiple burials in burial chambers and post-burials in 
megalithic graves, increase until 2300 BCE (Hübner, 2005; Schultrich, 2018). In the 
centuries between 2300 and 1150 BCE a focus on the individual is visible again, 
whereas from 1150 BCE, with the urn burial grounds, a levelling of the social stra­
tigraphy dominates, where the highlighted personality is no longer directly in focus 
(Kneisel, 2013; Schaefer-Di Maida, 2023; Schaefer-Di Maida & Kneisel, 2023).
Social Capital
The construction of monumental tombs on one hand is characterised by the con­
struction of dolmens and subsequently of passage tombs between 3400 and 
3100 BCE (Brozio et al., 2019). Long barrows from 3800 BCE, on the other hand, 
are quantitatively only comprehensible in small numbers (Müller et al., 2014). With 
SGC there is a construction boom of burial mounds from 2800  BCE onwards 
(Hübner, 2005). A decline from 2600 BCE is associated with secondary extensions 
of the existing burial mounds and reburials (Schultrich, 2018).
The increasing import of copper since the beginning of the Neolithic period has 
its first peak between 3500 and 3300 BCE (Klassen, 2000). By restricting exotic 
imports, triggered by changing networks, a second phase of the adaptation of metal­
lurgy only starts around 2300 BCE (Müller & Vandkilde, 2021; Schultrich, 2019).
In the 4th millennium BCE, amber as a local resource has an important function 
as a traditional clothing element and prestige good within the Funnel Beaker culture 
(TRB) groups. Amber hoards occur often in the Early Neolithic (before 3300 BCE). 
In the Middle Neolithic (3300–2800 BCE), however, amber beads predominantly 
appear in burial contexts (Ebbesen, 1995). In the SGC of the 3rd millennium BCE, 
amber artefacts occur in burials frequently in northern Jutland. However, they 
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
118
become less frequent in a southerly direction, at an increasing distance from the 
secondary deposits. Thus, amber increasingly loses its importance among the soci­
eties analysed (Hübner, 2005; Woltermann, 2016).
Relationships in the form of regional and supra-regional networks undergo a 
fundamental change around 3300  BCE (Müller, 2022). The import of copper 
(Brozio et al., 2023) as well as the introduction of new technologies such as the ard 
(Mischka, 2013), new products such as the free-threshing wheat (Kirleis & Fischer, 
2014) or ideas of social action such as the enclosures (Dibbern, 2016; Klassen, 
2014) reflect the high quality of the supra-regional relationship network. With the 
cancellation of copper imports from 3300 BCE, an increase in the importance of 
regional relations arises. This is accompanied by the joint construction of collective 
and monumental burial grounds. However, in the late Middle Neolithic 
(3100–2800 BCE), collective efforts decrease again while supra-regional communi­
cation increases (Müller et al., 2020). In this phase, individual signs of power and 
violence (the battle axe) increase in absolute numbers and in burials (Schultrich, 
2022). This phase paves the way for the SGC societies. Around 2800 BCE, the 
extensive networks of the SGC groups express themselves in the construction of 
their own architecture, which not least serve the legitimation and compliance with 
widely applied standards (Furholt, 2021). The increase in metal imports at the end 
of the Neolithic, on the other hand, enables the accumulation and expression of 
social capital through material culture, integrated into networks between southern 
Scandinavia and eastern Central Europe (Vandkilde, 2017).
With the transition to the Bronze Age, a gap in social capital seems to persist, 
lasting at least until 1500 BCE. It goes hand in hand with the formation of the south­
ern periphery of the Únětice culture and the associated network breakdowns, so that 
transregional exchange also decreases (Kneisel, 2012; Meller et al., 2013). From 
1500 BCE onwards, both burial mounds and gold finds increase markedly. Gold as 
a resource from outside shows the increasing connectivity of the southern Jutland 
peninsula and the establishment of wide-ranging contacts (Pahlow, 2006). But not 
everyone was entitled to a burial mound. Nevertheless, the number of Bronze Age 
mounds is much higher than in the Neolithic, but since only excavated mounds are 
included in the curve, the maxima of both time horizons are similar (cf. Holst, 2013, 
p. 42; Kristiansen & Larsson, 2005). Divergences in graves clearly indicate increas­
ing social differentiation, which continued until about 1100 BCE. Both the con­
struction of burial mounds and the addition of gold declined sharply from 1100 BCE 
onwards. Monumentality and networks thus lost importance again and it seems that 
now everyone could receive a grave in the form of an urn burial (Kneisel et al., 
2019; Kristiansen, 2006). The power of the individual (chief?) as well as the sense 
of the group and cooperation (e.g. for the construction of burial mounds) seem to 
have diminished at this time. In the course of the Younger Bronze Age 
(1100–500  BCE), burial mounds were built only sporadically, and these were 
mostly so-called small mounds, which were mainly restricted to the south of 
Holstein (Schmidt, 1993). Large and rich burial mounds are now the absolute excep­
tion (May, 2018; Thrane, 1984). The meaning of social capital thus shows a consid­
erable transformation around 1100 BCE.
J. P. Brozio et al.
119
Cultural Capital
Between 4100 and 2800 BCE, a high diversity of the shapes of vessels and decora­
tions of ceramics can be observed within the TRB (Lorenz, 2018). High diversity is 
present with the Fuchsberg style around 3500 BCE and then between 3100 and 
2900 BCE. From 2800 BCE there is a decline in diversity, containing the limited 
canon of forms of the SGC beakers, bowls and amphorae (Brozio, 2016; Müller & 
Peterson, 2015). From 2400 BCE, with the influence of bell beakers and the dagger 
groups, ceramics again become more diverse in terms of shapes and decorations 
(Hübner, 2005; Kleijne, 2019).
Ceramics as a means of expression of social reference is of great importance in 
the 4th millennium BCE. In the developing societies of the Neolithic, production 
and use of common forms and vessels provide opportunities to participate in 
regional and supra-regional sign systems. From 3100 BCE onwards, the increase is 
a reaction to a changing social system in which a developing shift from collective to 
individual consciousness can be observed, a phase in which hereditary capital trans­
fer is obfuscated. In the following centuries, on the other hand, a strong standardisa­
tion can be observed, in which cultural capital plays an important role as knowledge 
of action and represents the basis for power.
Around 1800 BCE, the standardisation of pottery collapses, reflecting a loss of 
previously cultivated cultural capital. While there is little variation in form, indi­
vidual decoration increases. A clear increase in the variance of decoration from 
1200 BCE onwards may be related to the introduction of urn burial, whereby the 
individual design of burial vessels gained importance against the background of 
otherwise very standardised burial methods (Schaefer-Di Maida, 2023). However, 
the discontinuation of standardisation in pottery production brings with it a new 
cultural capital, as metal objects become more relevant and standardised.
Economic Capital
During 4100–3300 BCE, an accumulation of objects in depots can be observed. 
Around 3200  BCE and 2800  BCE there was a decrease followed by phases of 
increase. A further increase of depots begins around 1800 BCE. Axes have a special 
significance as tools and as objects of value in the Neolithic, a peak is reached 
around 3300 BCE, and in the 3rd millennium BCE axes remain of great importance 
(Brozio et al., 2019). The beginning of the Neolithic is marked by an increase in 
human impact, which decreases between 3300 and 2900  BCE.  After a further 
increase, a new boom phase begins around 2200 BCE (Feeser et al., 2012). This 
phase is associated with the introduction of the surface-retouched flint sickle 
(Kühn, 1979).
Between 4100 and 3300  BCE we observe an increase in economic capital 
through land opening and increased forms of accumulation of value in depots. 
Economic power is reflected in the ability to remove imported objects from circula­
tion. At the same time, this is associated with demographic growth, which manifests 
itself in agglomerations in villages and manifests a quantitative increase in axes. At 
the beginning of the 3rd millennium BCE, a decline in economic capital takes place, 
followed by an economic boom phase from 2000 BCE (Brozio et al., 2019).
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
120
This boom continues, especially in the Early Bronze Age, and is boosted by a 
further increase in hoard finds around 1800 BCE, which exhausts the economic pos­
sibility of removing finds from circulation. The introduction of bronze arguably has 
a central role in this, in that the use of new networks possibly encouraged the 
requirement to give something back in order to maintain connections (Kristiansen 
& Earle, 2022, p. 13). The introduction of bronze also parallels the rise of monu­
mentality. The construction of burial mounds becomes an important part of eco­
nomic capital, as it requires the distribution of raw materials (Falkenstein, 2017). 
Sickle finds, however, decline again at this time, accompanied by a decrease in 
human impact. The use of hoards reaches a low point at the end of the Early Bronze 
Age around 1200/1100 BCE. With the introduction of cremation burials, a relevant 
transformation takes place, which probably also changes networks and world views 
(Schaefer-Di Maida, 2023). In the course of the Later Bronze Age, however, hoards 
became more important again and reached their peak. The composition of the hoards 
resembles grave furnishings, which, in contrast to the hoards, are rather sparsely 
furnished. It is possible that the hoard became a substitute for burial as a result, pos­
sibly because of increasing grave robbery due to a lack of bronze.
Human Impact
5.3
­
Demography
5.3
5.4
­
J. P. Brozio et al.
121
 
2021
provided no 14C data. Only Mang de Bargen, which has made a large database 
recently available, has shown a strong increase in graves (Schaefer-Di Maida, 2023). 
From 700  BCE onwards, corresponding dates are missing from the 14C curve 
because of insufficient dating due to the cremation burial custom and the Hallstatt 
plateau. For population development we therefore have to refer to the human impact 
curve from 1300 BCE onwards, which, according to the local example of Mang de 
Bargen, shows good correlation with the population development in the later Bronze 
Age. The sudden increase in the human impact curve around 2100 BCE is not as 
sharply visible in the cKDE model. However, the general trend of increasing human 
activity is witnessed in both proxy archives. The immense peak between 1500 and 
1300 BCE is not present in the human impact curve.
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
122
 
­
­
2021
5.4.2  Relations
­
­
5.5
J. P. Brozio et al.
123
 
5.5
­
Early Neolithic (4000–3500 BCE): The time slices of this phase are mainly located 
in the positive area of the x-axis, only the time slice 3500 BCE is in the nega­
tive area.
Middle Neolithic (3400–3000 BCE) and Younger Neolithic (2900–2300 BCE): 
Both chronological phases form a loose cluster in the negative area of the x-axis 
and show no outlying time slice.
Late Neolithic (2200–1700 BCE): It is the only chronological phase that exhibits 
high positive position on the y-axis. On the x-axis it is situated in the negative 
area of the graph. The time slice of 1700 BCE, however, separates itself from this 
pattern and lies in the positive area of the x-axis and negative on the y-axis.
Older Bronze Age (1600–1200 BCE): The early phase of the Older Bronze Age 
(1600–1500 BCE) is in the positive area of the x-axis, while the younger phase 
(1400–1200 BCE) of the Older Bronze Age is in the negative area.
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
124
Younger Bronze Age (1100–500 BCE): The beginning of the Younger Bronze Age 
(1100 BCE) lies in the negative area of the x-axis, while the majority of time 
horizons (1000–500 BCE) cluster in the positive area.
Turning the view to the attributes – the forms of capital – we see them arranged on 
the graph as distinguishable loose clusters demarcating spheres of attraction.
Social capital: Number of monuments, copper/gold and amber, are in the double 
negative area of the graph.
Symbolic capital: House size, number of daggers and hatchets/swords are in the 
negative range of the x-axis and scattered along the y-axis.
Economic capital: Number of sickles and of hoards, as well as monument size, are 
mainly located in the positive area of the x-axis. Different from this are the num­
ber of axes, which are placed in the double negative part of the graph.
Cultural capital: The diversity of ceramic decoration and ceramic form lie between 
economic and symbolic capital, diametrically opposed to each other.
What is striking is the shift of initial or final time slices of a chronological phase to 
an opposite part of the graph. These time slices are in each case initial or final 
phases of transformation processes and describe clear transition and change in 
importance of the forms of capital. It could be discussed in detail whether these time 
slices do not already belong to the next chronological phase, but we rely on the 
phase division of the Neolithic and the Bronze Age, which has developed in research 
history and saw good reasons to propose given breaks (Kneisel, 2021; Müller et al., 
2012; Müller & Vandkilde, 2021; Vandkilde, 1996, 2017). The PCA shows just as 
clearly as the time series representation that we are dealing with a change in the 
composition and significance of the forms of capital at the beginning and the end of 
our chronological phases. However, while this might appear to be nothing new, we 
provide the possibility of an in-depth multi-causal and inter-relational discussion of 
transformation processes.
In summary, a change along the y-axis can be seen in the Neolithic, with the Late 
Neolithic period in the positive area of the axis, while the rest are largely in the 
negative area. A change along the x-axis can be seen for the Bronze Age sections. 
Thus, the change within the Bronze Age stages is always between social and eco­
nomic, while the change in the Neolithic is between three forms of capital: social, 
symbolic and economic.
5.4.3  Correlations
5.5
J. P. Brozio et al.
125
In order to assess the concurrency of our chosen archaeological and demographic 
proxies apart from ‘eyeballing’ we use a pairwise Pearson’s correlation of the time 
series in 100-year bins, within time windows of 500  years, 1000  years and in 
archaeologically meaningful phases thereafter (Palmisano et al., 2021). The bin size 
is set by the temporal resolution of the archaeological proxies. Admittedly, the 100-­
year binning of the proxies leads to a small sample size for the correlation test and 
therefore the results need to be treated with caution. The results of all possible cor­
relations in the given time windows and the corresponding code can be accessed via 
the supplementary material.
5.2
­
5.6
5.2
5.7
Not least the copper boom, as well as the import stop of the same, between 3500 
and 3400 BCE can be seen as a turning point in the North, which probably had a 
lasting impact on the importance of the different forms of capital in society. The 
high number of amber finds and the large number of monuments from 3300 BCE 
onwards are evidence of elaborate local and small-scale regional networks. In 
another respect, this development is simultaneously expressed in the decrease in 
house sizes, which suggests smaller reference groups, among other things. Power 
relations are now more likely to be negotiated through the sizes and number of 
monuments. This indicates small, eventually complexly structured, groups that 
cooperate intensively with each other, but at the same time also compete with each 
other and have fewer supra-regional networks (Brozio et al., 2023; Wunderlich, 
2019). These developments partly go hand in hand with the agglomeration process 
of the settlement structure, which could lead to the described reorientation of capital 
forms. In more dense areas, communication and interaction behaviour for the nego­
tiation of power relations must develop differently than between dispersed groups 
that create their space in a landscape that is hardly shaped at all. Our demographic 
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
126
 
proxies show a population decline during the Middle Neolithic, whereby the 
agglomeration of settlement communities could play a role here.
5.8
5.2
­
After the Middle Neolithic, the decrease in monument size suggests a reduction 
in the size of the reference groups, and evidence of increased mobility. We assume 
that the basic organisation in complexly structured small groups with their local 
networks is nevertheless preserved. Superregional networks are present at this time 
with the connections to the Corded Ware but are not recorded due to our selection 
of material culture for the capital forms. Vegetation opening and human activity 
J. P. Brozio et al.
127
 
records a slight increase during the beginning of the SGC (2900–2600 BCE) and 
decreases towards the end (2500–2200 BCE). At the same time, an abrupt cooling 
event took place around 2900 BCE (Chap. 6).
­
5.9
6

5.3
5.4
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
128
 
and vegetation opening. The introduction of spelt and the crescent flint sickle may 
be expressions of such a turn in agriculture.
­
­
2019
2013
2003
1994
2002
J. P. Brozio et al.
129
 
development of new landscapes, but in the agglomeration of a new and valuable 
form of resource. This interconnectedness of capital forms is also evident in the 
expressive correlation of capital forms in the period from 1800 to 1400  BCE 
(Fig.  5.10; see supplementary material: Correlation 1800–1400). From 
1400/1300  BCE onwards, this correlation pattern again declines sharply 
(cf. Fig.  5.2; see supplementary material: Correlation 1300–900, 1100–700 and 
1000–600).
In the course of the Older Bronze Age (1500–1200  BCE), a change from 
economic to symbolic capital can again be detected from 1400  BCE onwards. 
A decrease in economic capital is indicated by fewer hoards and sickles. The rise in 
symbolic capital is clearly evidenced by the increasing house sizes and the high 
number of swords. The ambivalence of how social capital manifests is interesting, 
since it shows a very good integration of these societies into supra-regional net­
works as evidenced by gold imports; but at the same time, the increased number of 
monuments indicates the strengthening of local networks, proving an internal coop­
eration between the different communities. The social status of highlighted 
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
130
 
personalities is shaped by local power and supra-regional relations. After a drop in 
land opening around 1500 BCE, there is a renewed increase in human impact, but 
after 1400 BCE, the radiocarbon data show a trend of decreasing population density. 
Nevertheless, the demographic proxy shows the highest values between c. 1500 and 
1200 BCE, even if the preceeding and succeeding chronological phases may be 
subject to research bias, we have to assume a relatively large population. The ques­
tion is whether this increase in population coincides with an increase in social 
inequality and the desire to accumulate symbolic capital. We know that the time 
horizon between 1600 and 1500  BCE is a very important one across Europe, 
in which transformation processes take place in many regions, which in turn have 
an impact on the existing pan-European Bronze Age network (Kneisel, 2012; 
Meller et al., 2013). A migration to the north cannot be ruled out, but it is certain 
that the north consumed large quantities of high-quality bronzes in graves and 
hoarding behaviour during this period. A demographic peak around 1400 BCE can 
be explained by various effects, including the migration of people to the north after 
the collapse of social structures in the south (Kneisel, 2013; Vandkilde, 2017). If the 
J. P. Brozio et al.
131
growth rate of the demographic proxy is taken into account, however, a positive 
trend can already be seen in the Late Neolithic, which reaches its peak around 
1600 BCE and declines again from here on. Assuming that there is a wave of migra­
tion, there would also have to be a sharp increase, especially around 1600–1500 BCE, 
but that is not the case. It seems that the demographic trend is an internal one, the 
magnitude of which will have to be debated in the future. It is interesting to note that 
a negative growth rate correlates with a decrease in sickles, which may be due to 
changes in agricultural practices and intensification of animal husbandry. The Older 
Bronze Age is a period of high prosperity, which seems to have been characterised 
by a high degree of concurrence between communities and spheres of influence. 
The strong externalisation of symbolic capital in combination with the individual 
manifestations of the other forms of capital (e.g. high number of hoards and low 
number of sickles) and possible population pressure makes this reading of the 
data likely.
­
2023
2019
5.11
House sizes shrink significantly and objects indicating rank and prestige are 
present in significantly smaller numbers than in the previous chronological phase. 
The reduction of the number of houses has a great significance for the social struc­
ture of the Younger Bronze Age communities. Not only does the symbolism of the 
large house lose its significance, but it seems to indicate that the social units that 
previously inhabited the large houses emancipated themselves from each other and 
formed their own households (Mikkelsen, 2020). A probably similar process of 
emancipation and individualisation can be traced in the negotiation of ownership of 
farmland. During the Younger Bronze Age, so-called celtic fields are established, 
which demarcate agricultural land and can probably be understood as a sign of own­
ership. Over time, these fields become smaller, which is usually explained by the 
adoption of inheritance rights (Arnold, 2011; Løvschal & Holst, 2014). The change 
in the increased importance of economic capital is also evident in the huge rise in 
depositions of artefacts, testifying to the importance of negotiating and presenting 
exchange values and economic capabilities between and within communities. The 
renewed abundance of sickles fits well with the innovations in agriculture. The local 
networks of the Older Bronze Age seem to have been less pronounced, as the capital 
forms indicating collaboration and small-scale regional exchange (e.g. number of 
monuments and amber) are hardly developed. This is not the case for the supra-­
regional networks, which again seem to be less intensive than in the Older Bronze 
Age but can be proved by the presence of gold finds. In addition, we know connec­
tions to communities in Central Europe were present (iron, face/house urns, foreign 
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
132
 
forms in hoards), but due to our selection of material culture they are not recorded 
in the capital forms. The diversity of ceramic decorations also supports the idea of 
extensive contacts. As already mentioned, the transition from the Older to the 
Younger Bronze Age is a transformation phase in which many things happen and 
change (Kneisel, 2021). We see this clearly in our capital forms and the proxy for 
land opening. What we do not show with these proxies, however, is the change in 
burial customs from inhumations to cremations, which can be seen as a strong 
marker for changes in the social and ideological-religious system (Fokkens, 1997; 
Hofmann, 2008; Rebay-Salisbury, 2012; Schaefer-Di Maida, 2023). The change in 
burial rites is most likely to be linked to the abandonment of monument construc­
tion; from 1100 BCE onwards, burials as urn graves are mainly deposited in existing 
mounds of the Older Bronze Age. Within the subsistence economy, the introduction 
of millet is certainly significant during the Younger Bronze Age (Filipović et al., 
2020), and the increasing use of horses as mounts, possibly as work animals, is 
likely to have had an influence on social relations.
J. P. Brozio et al.
133
With regard to the selection of capital forms, recurring patterns can be identified 
in the section from the Early Neolithic to the end of the Bronze Age. The develop­
ment of the SGC and the Younger Bronze Age shows parallels in the relationship of 
the forms of capital, just as there seems to be no change in the forms of capital 
between the developed TRB and SGC.
5.5  Conclusion
The structures of social space are subject to dynamic processes that characteristi­
cally change in certain periods of time: until 3500 BCE, an increase in the impor­
tance of symbolic, cultural and social capital can be observed. This is associated 
with a phase of economic growth. In this period, which is connected with 
Neolithisation, the forms of capital emerge within the new economic forms. This 
includes the ability to accumulate land for agriculture, the membership of networks 
expressed through material culture, as well as the transmission of knowledge and 
the representations through monuments. A prerequisite to being able to accumulate 
surplus and produce symbolic capital – prestige and power – is economic security 
by colonising the landscape and establishing a reliable agricultural system. Around 
3000 BCE we observe a boom phase of cultural and symbolic capital. In contrast, 
there was a decline in social and economic capital. With the transition from the 4th 
to the 3rd millennium BCE, cultural capital is of major importance. It enables indi­
viduals or groups in society to distinguish themselves. At the same time, symbolic 
capital increases in societies, making it possible to acquire and consolidate power. 
After a boom in social capital, cultural capital declined around 2500 BCE, while 
economic and social capital remained stable. New cultural phenomena also lead to 
changes in social space. For example, cultural competences change due to the influ­
ence of the Bell Beakers phenomena, which had previously been determined for 
generations by belonging to pan-European networks of the social groups associated 
to Corded Ware Pottery. However, these new influences do not change the economy. 
With the transition from the 3rd to the 2nd millennium BCE, the importance of 
social and economic capital decreases in some areas. Cultural and symbolic capital, 
on the other hand, increase. The increasing adaptation of metal in societies enables 
new forms of display and the transmission of new emerging knowledge of action. 
The basis is formed by economic intensification, as a result of which the landscape 
is increasingly opened up to agriculture. From 1500 BCE, there is a shift in the 
importance of the forms of capital; symbolic capital rises first, followed by social 
capital and economic capital. Cultural capital in form of a wider variation of 
ornaments gains in importance. Around 1300  BCE, social capital and symbolic 
capital become more important. Cultural capital remains stable, while economic 
capital declines. The change in burial rites and associated transformations can 
be seen here as the engine of the shifts in the meaning of the forms of capital. 
This changes again around 1100  BCE, when the symbolic and social capital 
decrease sharply. The importance of cultural capital continues to grow with regard to 
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
134
ceramic ornamentation. At the same time, the economic capital increases drastically 
(the hoard finds in particular play a decisive role here) and does not decrease again 
until around 700 BCE. A slight change of increase and decrease in the social capital 
between 900 and 600 BCE is shown by the changes in networks known for the end 
of the Bronze Age and the transition to the Iron Age.
5.12
­
­
 
J. P. Brozio et al.
135
within society. Secondly, social capital in relation to membership of social groups. 
In addition, economic capital and cultural capital also show a strong correlation. In 
contrast, cultural capital and symbolic capital show only a low correlation. In this 
pattern, demographic developments are the trigger for changes in social structures 
that can be represented by different forms of capital.
Supplementary material  The data generated or analysed during this study are included in 
this published article and its supplementary materials and are available online in the Zenodo 
repository: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10535170.
References
Ahrens, C. (1966). Vorgeschichte des Kreises Pinneberg und der Insel Helgoland. Wachholtz.
Allentoft, M. E., Sikora, M., Refoyo-Martínez, A., Irving-Pease, E. K., Fischer, A., Barrie, W., 
Ingason, A., Stenderup, J., Sjögren, K.-G., Pearson, A., Sousa da Mota, B., Schulz Paulsson, 
B., Halgren, A., Macleod, R., Schjellerup Jørkov, M. L., Demeter, F., Novosolov, M., Sørensen, 
L., Nielsen, P. O. et al. (2022). Population genomics of Stone Age Eurasia (preprint). bioRxiv. 
http://biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2022.05.04.490594
Aner, E., & Kersten, K. (1978). Südschleswig-Ost. Die Kreise Schleswig-Flensburg und Rendsburg-­
Eckernförde (nördlich des Nord-Ostsee-Kanals). Wachholtz.
Aner, E., & Kersten, K. (1979). Südschleswig-West. Wachholtz.
Aner, E., & Kersten, K. (1991). Dithmarschen. Wachholtz.
Aner, E., & Kersten, K. (1993). Kreis Steinburg. Wachholtz.
Aner, E., Kersten, K., & Willroth, K.-H. (2005). Kreis Rendsburg-Eckernförde (südlich des 
Nord-­Ostsee-­Kanals) und die kreisfreien Städte Kiel und Neumünster. Wachholtz.
Aner, E., Kersten, K., & Willroth, K.-H. (2011). Kreis Segeberg. Wachholtz.
Aner, E., Kersten, K., & Willroth, K.-H. (2017). Kreise Plön und Ostholstein und die kreisfreie 
Hansestadt Lübeck. Wachholtz.
Appadurai, A. (1986). Introduction: Commodities and the politics of value. In A.  Appadurai 
(Ed.), The social life of things. Commodities in cultural perspective (pp. 64–91). Cambridge 
University Press.
Arnold, V. (2011). Celtic Fields und andere urgeschichtliche Ackersysteme in historisch alten 
Waldstandorten Schleswig-Holsteins aus Laserscandaten. Archäologisches Korrespondenzblatt, 
41, 439–455. https://doi.org/10.11588/ak.2011.3.21792
Bernbeck, R. (2009). Wertschöpfungstheorien von Marx und Mauss zu Baudrillard und Bourdieu. 
In B. Hildebrandt & C. Veit (Eds.), Der Wert der Dinge – Güter im Prestigediskurs. »Formen von 
Prestige in Kulturen des Altertums«. Graduiertenkolleg der DFG an der Ludwig-Maximilians-­
Universität München (pp. 29–72). Herbert Utz Verlag.
Bettencourt, L. M. A., Lobo, J., Helbig, D., Kühnert, C., & West, G. B. (2007). Growth, innova­
tion, scaling, and the pace of life in cities. PNAS, 104(17), 7301–7306. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.0610172104
Bevan, A., Crema, E. R., Li, X., & Palmisano, A. (2013). Intensities, interactions, and uncertain­
ties: Some new approaches to archaeological distributions. In A. Bevan & M. Lake (Eds.), 
Computational approaches to archaeological spaces (pp. 27–52). Left Coast Press.
Bevan, A., Crema, E. R., Bocinsky, K., Hinz, M., Riris, P., & Silva, F. (2022). rcarbon: Calibration 
and analysis of radiocarbon dates [Statistical programming package]. https://CRAN.R-­project.
org/package=rcarbon
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of theory and research 
for the sociology of education (pp. 241–258). Greenwood.
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
136
Breske, B. J. (2017). Untersuchungen zu neolithischen Beilen in Schleswig-Holstein [Unpublished 
master’s thesis]. Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel.
Brinkmann, J. (2019). Copper output, demand for wood and energy expenditure – Evaluating eco­
nomic aspects of Bronze Age metallurgy. In M. Dal Corso, W. Kirleis, J. Kneisel, N. Taylor, 
M. Wieckowska-Lüth, & M. Zanon (Eds.), How’s life? Living conditions in the 2nd and 1st 
Millennia BCE (pp. 11–34). Sidestone Press. https://doi.org/10.59641/e7245hq
Brozio, J. P. (2016). Megalithanlagen und Siedlungsmuster im trichterbecherzeitlichen Ostholstein. 
Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Brozio, J.  P. (2019). Zur absoluten Chronologie der Einzelgrabkultur in Norddeutschland und 
Nordjütland. Germania, 96, 45–92. https://doi.org/10.11588/GER.2018.65796
Brozio, J. P. (2020). From hierarchies in balance to social imbalance – Transformation processes 
in the later Funnel Beaker north societies in the western Baltic Sea region (3100–2900 BC). 
In A. B. Gebauer, L. Sørensen, A. Teather, & A. C. Valera (Eds.), Monumentalizing life in 
Neolithic Europe: Narratives of continuity and change (pp. 99–114). Oxbow Books.
Brozio, J. P., Müller, J., Furholt, M., Kirleis, W., Dreibrodt, S., Feeser, I., Dörfler, W., Weinelt, M., 
Raese, H., & Bock, A. (2019). Monuments and economies: What drove their variability in the 
middle-Holocene Neolithic? The Holocene [Special Issue: Scales of Transformation – Human-­
Environmental Interaction in Prehistoric and Archaic Societies], 29(10), 1558–1571. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0959683619857227
Brozio, J. P., Stos-Gale, Z., Müller, J., Müller-Scheeßel, N., Schultrich, S., Fritsch, B., Jürgens, F., 
& Skorna, H. (2023). The origin of Neolithic copper on the central Northern European plain 
and in Southern Scandinavia: Connectivities on a European scale. PLoS One, 18(5), Article 
e0283007. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0283007
Bunbury, M. M. E., Austvoll, K. I., Kirkeng Jørgensen, E., Vatsvåg Nielsen, S., Kneisel, J., Brozio, 
J. P., & Weinelt, M. 2023. Understanding climate resilience in Scandinavia during the Neolithic 
and early Bronze Age. Quaternary Science Reviews, 322, 1–20.
Bunnefeld, J.-H. (2014). Der Häuptling und sein Schwert? – Anmerkungen zur sozialen Stellung 
des Schwertträgers in der älteren nordischen Bronzezeit. In T.  Link & H.  Peter-Röcher 
(Eds.), Gewalt und Gesellschaft. Dimensionen der Gewalt in ur- und frühgeschichtlicher 
Zeit. Internationale Tagung vom 14.–16. März 2013 an der Julius-Maximilians-Universität 
Würzburg (pp. 133–143). Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Bunnefeld, J.-H. (2018). The chief and his sword? Some thoughts on the Swordbearer’s rank in the 
Early Nordic Bronze Age. In C. Horn & K. Kristiansen (Eds.), Warfare in Bronze Age society 
(pp. 198–212). Cambridge University Press.
Bunting, M. J., Farrell, M., Dunbar, E., Reimer, P., Bayliss, A., Marshall, P., & Whittle, A. (2022). 
Landscapes for Neolithic people in mainland, Orkney. Journal of World Prehistory, 35, 87–107. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10963-­022-­09166-­y
Crema, E. R. (2022). Statistical inference of prehistoric demography from frequency distribu­
tions of radiocarbon dates: A review and a guide for the perplexed. Journal of Archaeological 
Method and Theory, 29, 1387–1418. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10816-­022-­09559-­5
Crema, E. R., & Bevan, A. (2021). Inference from large sets of radiocarbon dates: Software and 
methods. Radiocarbon, 63(1), 23–39. https://doi.org/10.1017/RDC.2020.95
Dibbern, H. (2016). Das trichterbecherzeitliche Westholstein: Eine Studie zur neolithischen 
Entwicklung von Landschaft und Gesellschaft. Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Donat, P. (2018). Häuser der Bronze- und Eisenzeit im mittleren Europa. Beier & Beran. https://
doi.org/10.22032/dbt.45587
Ebbesen, K. (1995). Die nordischen Bernsteinhorte der Trichterbecherkultur. Prähistorische 
Zeitschrift, 70(1), 32–89. https://doi.org/10.1515/prhz.1995.70.1.32
Falkenstein, F. (2017). Zum Wandel der Bestattungssitten von der Hügelgräber- zur 
Urnenfelderkultur in Süddeutschland. In D. Brandherm & B. Nessel (Eds.), Phasenübergänge 
und Umbrüche im bronzezeitlichen Europa. Beiträge zur Sitzung der Arbeitsgemeinschaft 
Bronzezeit auf der 80. Jahrestagung des Nordwestdeutschen Verbandes für Altertumsforschung 
(pp. 77–96). Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
J. P. Brozio et al.
137
Feeser, I., Dörfler, W., Averdieck, F.-R., & Wiethold, J. (2012). New insight into regional and 
local land-use and vegetation patterns in eastern Schleswig-Holstein during the Neolithic. In 
M. Hinz & J. Müller (Eds.), Siedlung, Grabenwerk, Großsteingrab: Studien zu Gesellschaft, 
Wirtschaft und Umwelt der Trichterbechergruppen im nördlichen Mitteleuropa (pp. 159–190). 
Dr. Rudolf Habelt. https://www.monument.ufg.uni-­kiel.de/fileadmin/projekte/common/fmsd2/
FMSD_02.pdf
Feeser, I., Dörfler, W., Kneisel, J., Hinz, M., & Dreibrodt, S. (2019). Human impact and population 
dynamics in the Neolithic and bronze age: Multi-proxy evidence from north-western Central 
Europe. The Holocene [Special Issue: Scales of Transformation  – Human-Environmental 
Interaction in Prehistoric and Archaic Societies], 29(10), 1596–1606. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0959683619857223
Feinman, G. M. (2011). Size, complexity, and organizational variation: A comparative approach. 
Cross-Cultural Research, 45(1), 37–58. https://doi.org/10.1177/1069397110383658
Filipović, D., Meadows, J., Dal Corso, M., Kirleis, W., Alsleben, A., Akeret, Ö., Bittmann, F., 
Bosi, G., Ciută, B., Dreslerová, D., Effenberger, H., Gyulai, F., Heiss, A. G., Hellmund, M., 
Jahns, S., Jakobitsch, T., Kapcia, M., Klooß, S., Kohler-Schneider, M., et al. (2020). New 
AMS 14C dates track the arrival and spread of broomcorn millet cultivation and agricultural 
change in prehistoric Europe. Scientific Reports, 10(1), Article 13698. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-­020-­70495-­z
Fokkens, H. (1997). The genesis of urnfields: Economic crisis or ideological change? Antiquity, 
71(272), 360–372. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003598X00084970
Fontijn, D. (2002). Sacrificial landscapes. Cultural biographies of persons, objects and ‘natu­
ral’ places in the Bronze Age of the Southern Netherlands, c. 2300–600 BC. Sidestone Press. 
https://www.sidestone.com/books/sacrificial-­landscapes
Furholt, M. (2021). Mobility and social change: Understanding the European Neolithic period 
after the Archaeogenetic revolution. Journal of Archaeological Research, 29, 481–535. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10814-­020-­09153-­x
Gerritsen, F. (2009). To build and to abandon: The cultural biography of late prehistoric houses 
and farmsteads in the Southern Netherlands. Archaeological Dialogues, 6, 78–97. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S1380203800001410
Gosden, C., & Marshall, Y. (1999). The cultural biography of objects. World Archaeology, 31(2), 
169–178. https://doi.org/10.1080/00438243.1999.9980439
Hage, 
F. 
(2016). 
Büdelsdorf/Borgstedt: 
Eine 
trichterbecherzeitliche 
Kleinregion. 
Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Heitz, C., Hinz, M., Laabs, J., & Hafner, A. (2021). Mobility as resilience capacity in northern 
Alpine Neolithic settlement communities. Resilience & Archaeology, 36(1), 75–105. https://
doi.org/10.17863/CAM.79042
Hingst, H. (1959). Vorgeschichte des Kreises Storman. Wachholtz.
Hinz, M., Feeser, I., Sjögren, K.-G., & Müller, J. (2012). Demography and the intensity of cul­
tural activities: An evaluation of Funnel Beaker societies (4200–2800 cal BC). Journal of 
Archaeological Science, 39(10), 3331–3340. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2012.05.028
Hofmann, K. P. (2008). Der rituelle Umgang mit dem Tod: Untersuchungen zu bronze- und früh­
eisenzeitlichen Brandbestattungen im Elbe-Weser-Dreieck. Isensee Verlag.
Hoika, J.  A. J. (1999). Trichterbecherkultur  – Megalithkultur? Überlegungen zum 
Bestattungsbrauchtum der Trichterbecherkultur in Schleswig-Holstein und Mecklenburg. 
In K.  W. Beinhauer, G.  Cooney, C.  E. Guksch, & S.  Kus (Eds.), Studien zur Megalithik: 
Forschungsstand und ethnoarchäologische Perspektiven (pp. 173–198). Beier & Beran.
Holst, M. K. (2013). South Scandinavian Early Bronze Age barrows – A survey. In M. K. Holst & 
M. Rasmussen Lindegaard (Eds.), Skelhøj and the Bronze Age barrows of Southern Scandinavia: 
Vol I.  The Bronze Age barrow tradition and the excavation of Skelhøj (pp.  27–128). Jysk 
Arkæologisk Selskab.
Hübner, E. (2005). Jungneolithische Gräber auf der Jütländischen Halbinsel. Typologische und 
chronologische Studien zur Einzelgrabkultur. Det Kongelige Nordiske Oldskriftselskab.
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
138
Jahn, C. (2013). Symbolgut Sichel. Studien zur Funktion spätbronzezeitlicher Griffzungensicheln 
in Depotfunden. Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Joy, J. (2009). Reinvigorating object biography: Reproducing the drama of object lives. World 
Archaeology, 41(4), 540–556. https://doi.org/10.1080/00438240903345530
Jung, M. (2015). Das Konzept der Objektbiographie im Lichte einer Hermeneutik materieller 
Kultur. In D. Boschung, P. A. Kreuz, & T. Kienlin (Eds.), Biography of objects (pp. 35–65). 
Wilhelm Fink Verlag.
Kadrow, S., & Müller, J. (2019). Habitus? The social dimension of technology and transformation. 
In S. Kadrow & J. Müller (Eds.), Habitus? The social dimension of technology and transforma­
tion (pp. 11–14). Sidestone Press. https://doi.org/10.59641/d6356gp
Kersten, K. (1951). Vorgeschichte des Kreises Herzogtum Lauenburg. Wachholtz.
Kersten, K. (1981). Die archäologische Landesaufnahme von Schleswig-Holstein. Offa. Berichte 
Und Mitteilungen Zur Urgeschichte, Frühgeschichte Und Mittelalterarchäologie, 38, 17–20.
Kersten, K., & Schwantes, G. (1939). Vorgeschichte des Kreises Steinburg. Wachholtz.
Kirleis, W., & Fischer, E. (2014). Neolithic cultivation of tetraploid free threshing wheat in 
Denmark and Northern Germany: Implications for crop diversity and societal dynamics of 
the Funnel Beaker Culture. Vegetation History and Archaeobotany, 23, 81–96. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00334-­014-­0440-­8
Klassen, L. (2000). Frühes Kupfer im Norden. Untersuchungen zu Chronologie, Herkunft und 
Bedeutung der Kupferfunde der Nordgruppe der Trichterbecherkultur. Moesgård Museum.
Klassen, L. (2004). Jade und Kupfer: Untersuchungen zum Neolithisierungsprozess im westlichen 
Ostseeraum unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Kulturentwicklung Europas 5500–3500 
BC. Aarhus University Press.
Klassen, L. (2014). Along the road: Aspects of causewayed enclosures in South Scandinavia and 
beyond. Aarhus University Press.
Kleijne, J. (2019). Embracing Bell Beaker: Adopting new ideas and objects across Europe 
during the later 3rd millennium BC (c. 2600–2000 BC). Sidestone Press. https://doi.
org/10.59641/c5467fo
Kleijne, J., Brozio, J.  P., Pfeiffer, A., Storch, S., & Kootker, A. (2021). Near the ancestors 
at Archsum: A contemporaneous Bell Beaker grave and settlement? Offa. Berichte und 
Mitteilungen zur Urgeschichte, Frühgeschichte und Mittelalterarchäologie, 3, 55–80. https://
doi.org/10.26016/offa.2020.A3
Kneisel, J. (2012). The problem of the Middle Bronze Age inception in Northeast Europe—
Or: Did the Únětice society collapse? In J. Kneisel, W. Kirleis, M. Dal Corso, N. Taylor, & 
V. Tiedtke (Eds.), Collapse or continuity? Environment and development of Bronze Age human 
landscapes. Proceedings of the international workshop ‘socio-environmental dynamics over 
the last 12,00 years: The creation of landscapes II (14th–18th March 2011)’ in Kiel (Vol. 1, 
pp. 209–233). Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Kneisel, J. (2013). Der Übergang von der Frühbronzezeit zur Mittelbronzezeit im nordöstlichen 
Mitteleuropa. Lücke oder Forschungsdesiderat? In J. Kneisel, H. J. Behnke, & A. Schopper 
(Eds.), Frühbronzezeit – Mittelbronzezeit. Neue Erkenntnisse zur Besiedlung zwischen Elbe 
und Warthe und angrenzender Regionen (2000–1400 v. Chr.). Symposium vom 24.–25. Sept. 
2011 in Welzow/Brandenburg (pp. 95–120). Rudolf Habelt.
Kneisel, J. (2021). Chronology and transformation. The transition from Bronze to Iron Age in 
Northern Europe. In E. Kaiser & W. Schier (Eds.), Time and materiality: Periodization and 
regional chronologies at the transition from Bronze to Iron Age in Eurasia (1200–600 BCE) 
(pp. 237–263). VML Verlag Marie Leidorf.
Kneisel, J., Hinz, M., & Rinne, C. (2013). Radon-B – Radiocarbondates online (version 2014). 
Database for European 14C dates for the Bronze and Early Iron Age [Data set]. http://radon-­b.
ufg.uni-­kiel.de/
Kneisel, J., Dörfler, W., Dreibrodt, S., Schaefer-Di Maida, S., & Feeser, I. (2019). Cultural change 
and population dynamics during the Bronze Age: Integrating archaeological and palaeoenvi­
ronmental evidence for Schleswig-Holstein, Northern Germany. The Holocene [Special Issue: 
Scales of Transformation  – Human-Environmental Interaction in Prehistoric and Archaic 
Societies], 29(10), 1607–1621. https://doi.org/10.1177/0959683619857237
J. P. Brozio et al.
139
Kneisel, J., Schaefer-Di Maida, S., & Feeser, I. (2022). Settlement patterns in the Bronze Age 
Western Baltic Comparisons at different regional scales. In F.  Nikulka, D.  Hofmann, & 
R.  Schumann (Eds.), The Baltic in the Bronze Age. Regional patterns, interactions and 
boundaries (pp.  189–217). Sidestonepress. https://www.sidestone.com/books/the-­baltic-­
in-­the-­bronze-­age
Kohler, T. A., & Smith, M. E. (2018). Ten thousand years of inequality: The archaeology of wealth 
differences. University of Arizona Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt20d8801
Kopytoff, I. (1986). The cultural biography of things: Commoditization as process. In A. Appadurai 
(Ed.), The social life of things. Commodities in cultural perspective (pp. 64–91). Cambridge 
University Press.
Krause, R. (2003). Studien zur kupfer- und frühbronzezeitlichen Metallurgie zwischen 
Karpatenbecken und Ostsee. VML Verlag Marie Leidorf.
Kristiansen, K. (1984). Krieger und Häuptlinge in der Bronzezeit Dänemarks. Ein Beitrag 
zur Geschichte des bronzezeitlichen Schwertes. Jahrbuch Des Römisch-Germanischen 
Zentralmuseums Mainz, 31, 187–208. https://doi.org/10.11588/jrgzm.1984.0.58781
Kristiansen, K. (2006). Cosmology, economy and long-term change in the Bronze Age of Northern 
Europe. In K.-G. Sjögren (Ed.), Ecology and economy in Stone Age and Bronze Age Scania 
(pp. 171–193). Riksantikvarieämbetet.
Kristiansen, K., & Earle, T. (2022). Modelling modes of production: European 3rd and 2nd 
Millennium BC economies. In M. Frangipane, M. Poettinger, & B. Schefold B. (Eds.), Ancient 
economies in comparative perspective. Material life, institutions and economic thought 
(pp. 131–163). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-­3-­031-­08763-­9_8
Kristiansen, K., & Larsson, T. B. (2005). The rise of Bronze Age society. Travels, transmissions 
and transformations. Cambridge University Press.
Kühn, H. J. (1979). Das Spätneolithikum in Schleswig-Holstein. Wachholtz.
Lechterbeck, J., Edinborough, K., Kerig, T., Fyfe, R., Roberts, N., & Shennan, S. (2014). Is 
Neolithic land use correlated with demography? An evaluation of pollen derived land cover 
and radiocarbon-inferred demographic change from Central Europe. The Holocene, 24(10), 
1297–1307. https://doi.org/10.1177/0959683614540952
Lorenz, L. (2012). Keramiklaufzeiten und die Nutzungsdauer nordostdeutscher Megalithgräber. In 
M. Hinz & J. Müller (Eds.), Siedlung, Grabenwerk, Großsteingrab: Studien zu Gesellschaft, 
Wirtschaft und Umwelt der Trichterbechergruppen im nördlichen Mitteleuropa (pp. 61–86). 
Dr. Rudolf Habelt. https://www.monument.ufg.uni-­kiel.de/fileadmin/projekte/common/fmsd2/
FMSD_02.pdf
Lorenz, L. (2018). Kommunikationsstrukturen mittelneolithischer Gesellschaften im nordmitteleu­
ropäischen Tiefland. Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Løvschal, M., & Holst, M. K. (2014). Repeating boundaries – Repertoires of landscape regulations 
in southern Scandinavia in the Late Bronze Age and Pre-Roman Iron Age. Danish Journal of 
Archaeology, 3(2), 95–118. https://doi.org/10.1080/21662282.2014.990311
May, J. (2018). Neue Forschungen am „Königsgrab“ von Seddin. In S. Hansen & F. Schopper 
(Eds.), Der Grabhügel von Seddin im norddeutschen und südskandinavischen Kontext. 
Internationale Konferenz International Conference 16. bis 20. Juni 2014, Brandenburg an 
der Havel (pp. 9–35). Brandenburgisches Landesamt für Denkmalpflege und Archäologisches 
Landesmuseum.
Meier, D. (2013). Eine Siedlung der älteren Bronzezeit in Schleswig-Holstein. In K.-H. Willroth 
(Ed.), Siedlungen der älteren Bronzezeit. Beiträge zur Siedlungsarchäologie und Paläoökologie 
des zweiten vorchristlichen Jahrtausends in Südskandinavien, Norddeutschland und den 
Niederlanden. Workshop vom 7. bis 9. April 2011 in Sankelmark (pp. 91–118). Wachholtz.
Meller, H., Bertemes, F., Bork, H.-R., & Risch, R. (Eds.). (2013). 1600—Kultureller Umbruch im 
Schatten des Thera-Ausbruchs? 1600 – Cultural change in the shadow of the Thera-Eruption? 
4. Mitteldeutscher Archäologentag vom 14. Bis 16. Oktober 2011 in Halle (Saale). Landesamt 
für Denkmalpflege und Archäologie Sachsen-Anhalt – Landesmuseum für Vorgeschichte.
Mikkelsen, M. (2020). Slaves in Bronze Age Southern Scandinavia? Acta Archaeologica, 91(1), 
147–190. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-­0390.2020.12225.x
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
140
Mischka, D. (2004). Aoristische Analyse in der Archäologie. Archäologische Informationen, 
27(2), 233–243.
Mischka, D. (2013). Die sozioökonomische Bedeutung von Pflugspuren im Frühneolithikum 
des nördlichen Mitteleuropas. In I. Heske, H.-J. Nüsse, & J. Schneeweiß (Eds.), Landschaft, 
Besiedlung und Siedlung: Archäologische Studien im nordeuropäischen Kontext (pp. 295–306). 
Wachholtz.
Müller, J. (2013). Mesolithisch  – neolithisch: Zur Entwicklung von Hütten und Häusern im 
südlichen Skandinavien und nördlichen Mitteleuropa. Offa. Berichte und Mitteilungen 
zur Urgeschichte, Frühgeschichte und Mittelalterarchäologie, 69, 249–264. https://doi.
org/10.26016/offa.2012.A21
Müller, J. (2019). Boom and bust, hierarchy and balance: From landscape to social meaning – 
Megaliths and societies in Northern Central Europe. In J. Müller, M. Hinz, & M. Wunderlich 
(Eds.), Megaliths – Societies – Landscapes. Early monumentality and social differentiation 
in Neolithic Europe. Proceedings of the international conference »Megaliths  – Societies  – 
Landscapes. Early Monumentality and Social Differentiation in Neolithic Europe« (16th–20th 
June 2015) in Kiel (Vol. 1, pp. 31–76). Dr. Rudolf Habelt. https://www.monument.ufg.uni-­kiel.
de/fileadmin/projekte/common/fmsd18/Megaliths_Societies_Landscapes_1.pdf
Müller, J. (2022). Funnel Beaker societies and long-distance trade. In J.  Ling, R.  Chacon, & 
K. Kristiansen (Eds.), Trade before civilization. Long-distance exchange and the rise of social 
compexity (pp. 23–39). Cambridge University Press.
Müller, J., & Kirleis, W. (2019). The concept of socio-environmental transformations in prehis­
toric and archaic societies in the Holocene: An introduction to the special issue. The Holocene 
[Special Issue: Scales of Transformation – Human-Environmental Interaction in Prehistoric 
and Archaic Societies], 29(10), 1517–1530. https://doi.org/10.1177/0959683619857236
Müller, J., & Peterson, R. (2015). Ceramics and Society in Northern Europe. In C.  Fowler, 
J. Harding, & D. Hofmann (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of Neolithic Europe (pp. 573–604). 
Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199545841.013.030
Müller, J., & Vandkilde, H. (2021). 2. The Nordic Bronze Age Rose from Copper Age diver­
sity: Contrasts in the Cimbrian Peninsula. In K. I. Austvoll, M. H. Eriksen, P. D. Fredriksen, 
L. Melheim, L. Prøsch-Danielsen, & L. Skogstrand (Eds.), Contrasts of the Nordic Bronze 
Age. Essays in honour of Christopher Prescott (pp. 29–48). Brepols Publishers. https://doi.
org/10.1484/M.TANE-­EB.5.120581
Müller, J., Brozio, J. P., Demnick, D., Dibbern, H., Fritsch, B., Furholt, M., Hage, F., Hinz, M., 
Lorenz, L., Mischka, D., & Rinne, C. (2012). Periodisierung der Trichterbecher-Gesellschaften. 
Ein Arbeitsentwurf. In M. Hinz & J. Müller (Eds.), Siedlung, Grabenwerk, Grosssteingrab. 
Studien zu Gesellschaft, Wirtschaft und Umwelt der Trichterbechergruppen im nördlichen 
Mitteleuropa (pp.  29–34). Dr. Rudolf Habelt. https://www.monument.ufg.uni-­kiel.de/filead­
min/projekte/common/fmsd2/FMSD_02.pdf
Müller, J., Dibbern, H., & Hage, F. (2014). Non-megalithic mounds beneath megaliths: 
A new perspective on monumentality in North Central Europe. In M.  Furholt (Ed.), 
Landscapes, histories and societies in the Northern European Neolithic (pp.  171–182). 
Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Müller, J., Brozio, J. P., Dörfler, W., & Kirleis, W. (2020). Narratives of 3rd-millennium transfor­
mations: New biographies of Neolithic societies, landscapes and monuments. In A. B. Gebauer, 
L. Sørensen, A. Teather, & A. C. Valera (Eds.), Monumentalizing life in Neolithic Europe: 
Narratives of continuity and change (pp. 115–124). Oxbow Books.
Pahlow, M. (2006). Gold in der Bronzezeit in Schleswig-Holstein. Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Palmisano, A., Bevan, A., Kabelindde, A., Roberts, N., & Shennan, S. (2021). Long-term demo­
graphic trends in prehistoric Italy: Climate impacts and regionalised socio-ecological trajecto­
ries. Journal of World Prehistory, 34, 381–432. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10963-­021-­09159-­3
Parkinson, E. W., McLaughlin, T. R., Esposito, C., & Stoddart, & Malone, C. (2021). Radiocarbon 
dated trends and Central Mediterranean prehistory. Journal of World Prehistory, 34, 317–379. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10963-­021-­09158-­4
J. P. Brozio et al.
141
Polanyi, K. (1944). The great transformation: The political and economic origins of our time. 
Beacon Press.
Rassmann, K. (1993). Spätneolithikum und frühe Bronzezeit im Flachland zwischen Elbe und 
Oder. Archäologisches Landesmuseum für Mecklenburg-Vorpommern.
Ratcliffe, J. H. (2000). Aoristic analysis: The spatial interpretation of unspecific temporal events. 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 14(7), 669–679. https://doi.
org/10.1080/136588100424963
Rebay-Salisbury, K.  C. (2012). Inhumation and cremation: How burial practices are linked 
to beliefs. In K. C. Rebay-Salisbury & M. L. Stig Sørensen (Eds.), Embodied knowledge: 
Historical perspectives on belief and technology (pp. 15–26). Oxbow Books.
Rech, K.  W. (1979). Studien zu Depotfunden der Trichterbecher- und Einzelgrabkultur des 
Nordens. Wachholtz.
Rick, J. W. (1987). Dates as data: An examination of the Peruvian preceramic radiocarbon record. 
American Antiquity, 52(1), 55–73. https://doi.org/10.2307/281060
Schaefer-Di Maida, S. (2023). Unter Hügeln. Bronzezeitliche Transformationsprozesse in 
Schleswig-Holstein am Beispiel des Fundplatzes von Mang de Bargen (Bornhöved, Kr. 
Segeberg) [Doctoral dissertation, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel]. Sidestone Press. 
https://doi.org/10.59641/q9013tc
Schaefer-Di Maida, S., & Kneisel, J. (2023). The urnfield phenomenon in Schleswig-Holstein: 
New insights into the chronology and hypotheses. In A.  R. Rose, L.  M. Christensen, & 
A. J. Louwen (Eds.), Beyond Urnfields. New Perspectives on Late Bronze Age – Early Iron Age 
Funerary Practices in Northwest Europe (pp. 117–132). Verlag Ludwig.
Schmidt, J.-P. (1993). Studien zur jüngeren Bronzezeit in Schleswig-Holstein und dem nordel­
bischen Hamburg. Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Schultrich, S. (2018). Das Jungneolithikum in Schleswig-Holstein. Sidestone Press. https://doi.
org/10.59641/b4578en
Schultrich, S. (2019). Flint and Bronze in Late Neolithic Schleswig-Holstein: Distribution, con­
texts and meanings. Journal of Neolithic Archaeology, 20, 13–82. https://doi.org/10.12766/
jna.2018.2
Schultrich, S. (2022). Kriegerideal und Netzwerke: Die Doppeläxte West- und Mitteleuropas im 
Kontext der jung- bis endneolithischen Kulturentwicklung [Doctoral dissertation, Christian-­
Albrechts-­Universität zu Kiel]. https://macau.uni-­kiel.de/receive/macau_mods_00002793
Shennan, S., & Edinborough, K. (2007). Prehistoric population history: From the late glacial to 
the Late Neolithic in Central and Northern Europe. Journal of Archaeological Science, 34, 
1339–1345. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2006.10.031
Shennan, S., Edinborough, K., & Kerig, T. (2017). Demographische Modellbildung als Schlüssel 
zu Kulturkontakt und Kommunikation: Fallbeispiel Neolithisierung Zentral- und Nordwest-­
Europas. In T.  Link & J.  Pycel (Eds.), Kulturkontakt und Kommunikation und aktuelle 
Forschungen zum Neolithikum (pp. 33–47). Welt und Erde Verlag.
Sommerfeld, C. (1994). Gerätegeld Sichel. Studien zur monetären Struktur bronzezeitlicher Horte 
im nördlichen Mitteleuropa. De Gruyter. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110857948
Spellerberg, I. F., & Fedor, P. J. (2003). A tribute to Claude Shannon (1916–2001) and a plea for 
more rigorous use of species richness, species diversity and the ‘Shannon–Wiener’ Index. Global 
Ecology and Biogeography, 12(3), 177–179. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1466-­822X.2003.00015.x
Steffens, J. (2009). Die neolithischen Fundplätze von Rastorf, Kreis Plön. Eine Fallstudie zur 
Trichterbecherkultur im nördlichen Mitteleuropa am Beispiel eines Siedlungsraumes. 
Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Svanberg, F. (2005). House Symbolismin aristocratic death rituals of the bronze age. In T. Artelius 
& F.  Svanberg (Eds.), Dealing with the dead. Archaeological perspectives on prehistoric 
Scandinavian burial ritual (pp. 73–98). National Heritage Board.
Thrane, H. (1984). Lusehøj ved Voldtofte – en sydvestfynsk storhøj fra yngre broncealder. Odense 
Bys Museer.
5  Patterns of Socio-economic Cultural Transformations in Neolithic and Bronze Age…
142
van der Velde, H.  M., Bouma, N., & Raemaekers, D. (Eds.). (2020). Making a Neolithic 
non-megalithic monument. A TRB burial ground at Dalfsen (the Netherlands), c. 3000–2750 cal. 
BC. Sidestone Press. https://www.sidestone.com/books/making-­a-­neolithic-­non-­megalithic-­
monument
Vandkilde, H. (1996). From stone to bronze: The metalwork of the Late Neolithic and the earliest 
Bronze Age in Denmark. Jutland Archaeological Society.
Vandkilde, H. (2017). The metal hoard from Pile in Scania, Sweden. Aarhus University Press.
Willroth, K.-H. (2002). Die nordische Bronzezeit. Anmerkungen zu ihrer Herausbildung. Bericht 
der Römisch-Germanischen Kommission, 83, 99–122.
Woltermann, G. (2016). Die prähistorischen Bernsteinartefakte aus Deutschland vom 
Paläolithikum bis zur Bronzezeit. Dr. Rudolf Habelt.
Wunderlich, M. (2019). Megalithic monuments and social structures. Comparative studies on 
recent and Funnel Beaker societies (Vol. 10.59641/f8134ir). Sidestone Press.
Zápotocký, M. (1992). Streitäxte des mitteleuropäischen Äneolithikums. VCH Acta Humaniora.
Open Access  This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and 
indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative 
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by 
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder.
J. P. Brozio et al.
